---
layout: post
title: Single Spectrum Analysis 
description: SSA 
summary: SSA 
author:
- Pavan Donthireddy
usemathjax: true
tags: [trend_extraction, SSA]
---

The main steps of SSA can be summarized as follows:

For a time series $x(n)$ for $n=1,2\dots N$, let the window length be $L$ , where  $1<L<N$. The first step of SSA is to construct a trajectory matrix as follows. Define the $L$ dimensional vectors as

$$
X_{n}=\begin{bmatrix} x(n)\\ \vdots \\ x(n+L-1)
\end{bmatrix}
$$

for $n =1,2,\dots, N − L +1$. 

Denote $K = N − L +1$. These $K$ vectors are put into a matrix and the $L \times K$ trajectory matrix is constructed as follows:

$$
X = \begin{bmatrix}
X_{1} & X_{2} & \dots & X_{K}
\end{bmatrix}
$$

The second step is to express $X$ as the sum of component matrices. Let $S=XX^T$ and the eigenvalues of $S$ be $\lambda_{1}\ge\lambda_{2}\dots\ge\lambda_{L}\ge 0$. Define $D=\max\{j:\lambda_{j}>0\}$. Let $U_{1},\dots,U_{D}$ be the corresponding eigenvectors. 

Denote $V_{j}=\frac{X^TU_{j}}{\sqrt{ \lambda_{j} }}$ for $j=1,2,\dots,D$  be the factor vectors. 

Define:

$$
\tilde{X}_{j} =\sqrt{\lambda_{j}}U_{j}V_{j}^T
$$

for $j=1,2,\dots,D$. It can be shown that $X$ can be represented as

$$
X = \tilde{X}_{1}+\dots+\tilde{X}_{D}
$$

The third step is to represent $X$ as the sum of grouped matrix components as follows. The indices set $\{1,\dots,D\}$ is partitioned into $M$ disjoint subsets $I_{1}\dots I_{M}$. Let $I_{m} =\{i_{m_{1}},\dots,{i_{m_{c}}}\}$ for $m=1,\dots, M$ and 

$$
\tilde{X}_{I_{m}}=\tilde{X}_{i_{m_{1}}}+\dots+\tilde{X}_{i_{m_{C}}}
$$ 


Hence we have

$$
X=\tilde{X}_{I_{1}}+\dots+\tilde{X}_{I_{M}}
$$


The final step is to reconstruct the signal by the diagonal averaging method. 


First, transform  new text $\tilde{X}_{I_m}$ into new one dimensional signals of length $N$ by the hankelization like procedure. 

The vectors and the transform operator are denoted as $\tilde{x}_{I_m}$  for $m=1,\dots,M$ and  $\Im(.)$ respectievely. That is 

$$
\tilde{x}_{I_{m}} = \Im(\tilde{X}_{I_{m}}) ; m=1,\dots,M
$$

Thus the original time series can be expressed as a sum of $M$ series,

$$
x(n)=\tilde{x}_{I_{1}}(n)+\dots+\tilde{x}_{I_{M}}(n) ; n=1,\dots,N
$$
